This book once made me believe that I
could become a polygod. Catalom, how I
learn languages is the reason I fell in
love with language learning. I first
found it at school and it inspired me so
much that later I chose to study
linguistics at university. I speak
several languages. I'm learning my
seventh language. And in this video, I'm
going to share what I still find
inspiring and what I don't completely
agree with anymore. Catalom herself was
a true legend. She studied around 28
languages, could speak around 16 of
them, fluently enough to work as a
professional interpreter, even a
simultaneous interpreter, which was
extremely rare back then, especially for
a woman. She mentions that she was no
talent for languages. She started
learning in her adult years, and proves
that progress comes from interest and
time, not from being gifted. She even
puts it into a formula, time spent plus
interest equals result. She says that
there is no magic peel for learning a
language. People often tell me, "Oh, you
just have a talent for languages, but
like Lump, I honestly don't understand
it." Another point that Lump makes, and
I really relate to this, is how adults
block themselves when speaking a foreign
language. They are so afraid of making
mistakes that they end up saying nothing
at all. And I used to be exactly like
that when I was learning my first
foreign language. I was so embarrassed
to make even small mistakes. I was just
silent. But now after studying more and
more languages, I honestly don't care
anymore. Mistakes are just part of the
process and they are evidence that you
are actually using the language. So
let's update the formula, the previous
formula like this. Time plus motivation
divided by fear equals result. There is
another interesting moment in the book
when she says that men are actually more
blocked and embarrassed when speaking a
foreign language. While women are women
are less shy and have a stronger need
for communication. It's an interesting
point and I'm not sure whether I agree
with it or not. What do you think? So
talking about being gifted about
abilities, you don't have to be a
linguist or a genius to learn several
languages. A linguist is a person who
studies the theory of language who it's
grammar structure, phonatics, everything
profoundly. And she compares it to a
choreographer. Like a linguist is a
choreographer who studies dance and a
ballerina who actually dances. So you
can be a ballerina. Another thing that I
love about this book is that she writes
that learning languages shouldn't feel
like a burden but like a moment of
enjoyment and in everyday life. like it
should be your routine that makes you
enjoy your life and this is exactly how
I try to teach my students. I want
languages to feel alive connected to
their interest and never just a set of
grammar rules and this is when I
realized that in many ways her words
shape my own teaching philosophy even
before I realized it even before
entering the university. So why do we
study languages? I think it's pretty
clear to be engaged with the world with
people with different ways of thinking.
And Lom has a beautiful line about this
in her book. She writes, "We study
languages because language is the only
way is the only thing that is never
useless to know even superficially." And
I couldn't agree more. Even the smallest
knowledge of a language, a few phrases,
some basic understanding can open doors,
create connections, and change how you
see the world. So you don't have to know
all the languages proficiently. Just
start learning a language and probably
you will move further just by being
interested in it, being engaged in the
process. When it comes to her
methodology, I find myself agreeing with
her on many points, not all, but many,
especially with her idea that a language
should be learned as a whole. She
compares knowledge to a nail. If it
isn't driven deep enough at the first
pressure it will fall out. And the same
with languages if you only study them
passively just by reading and listening
without practice without output active
output these languages won't simply
hold. Another metaphor that I love is
how she describes language as a
building. It has four grand holes
speaking listening reading and writing.
And you can only call yourself truly at
home in this building if you have
entered all of these four holes. If you
neglect one of them, the whole
construction feels unstable. Doesn't
feel like home. I really connect with
this idea with this metaphor because for
me, language learning has never been
about collecting loose words or grammar
rules. It's about building this solid
structure brick by brick, making sure
that every hole is open, every room is
alive. That's exactly what I try to give
my students. Not just grammar rules, not
just fragments or lose words as I've
said before, but a living system where
all the parts support each other. It is
interesting that on the other hand, alum
criticizes what we would now call
immersion. She says it can feel like
mindless, something as passive as
watching TV. For her, real language
learning for adults should rely on
conscious effort, logical thinking, and
deliberate practice, which is right
because adults don't actually learn like
children. Uh we can't just be thrown
into a new English speaking or any other
language speaking environment and expect
that our brain will absorb everything
the way a toddler does. It won't work
like that because we're not toddlers.
We're not babies anymore. But at the
same time, reducing immersion to
something passive or thoughtless feels
very unfair. From my own experience,
immersion is one of the most powerful
tools that we have like watching movies,
watching podcasts, listening to even
listening to music, surrounding yourself
with the language. It isn't about
switching your brain off. It's about
letting these patterns, these language
patterns, uh, sink in naturally and then
reinforcing them in conscious practice.
So, while I understand her skepticism, I
think immersion is not the enemy of
conscious learning, it's its strongest
ally. Together, they create a great
balance for adults when they learn
languages. Logic gives you structure,
immersion gives you life. Lom talks a
lot about vocabulary in this book. How
we should learn it, how we shouldn't
learn it. She criticizes this old form
of learning language, of learning
vocabulary, you know, two column method
where we write a word in one column and
it's translation in another column next
to it. And I criticize it as well
because if we learn the words this way,
they will stay isolated. They will stay
they will be detached from the real
usage. So what you should remember is
that words don't live alone. They live
in context. They live in collocations.
They live in phrases, not alone. But
then at the same time, she defends the
method that is called a dictionary
method. It's about simply learning words
uh straight from a dictionary. I don't
understand this method. Like I don't
think it's effective. Of course,
dictionaries are essential. It's a great
great tool. But again, they strip words
away from life. They're not in context.
They're not in real usage. And I agree
with Lom that the more energy we invest
in searching for the right meaning using
a dictionary, the stronger the effect of
learning the language of the of
memorizing the the the vocabulary. I
agree with it. It's it's definitely
true. So, what's the best way to work
with a dictionary? For me, it's not
about copying readymade examples or
cramming lists of words. It's about
taking a word, writing it down in your
notebook and immediately creating a
sentence with this word, your own
sentence, your own example with it. So
this way the word becomes linked to you,
to your life, to your thoughts, to your
experience and it will be more effective
uh for you to memorize it. When it comes
to grammar, I actually agree with Lump
with one of her central points that
grammar is a system. And if you want to
master a foreign language as an adult,
you simply cannot avoid the system. You
simply cannot avoid learning grammar.
And again, it's not about memorizing
about cramming uh sets of rules. Grammar
should be studied in combination uh with
other aspects of language through
reading, through listening, through
meaningful context. Without this
systematic approach, adult learners risk
ending up with this fragmented knowledge
that doesn't work in real communication.
I disagree with LM on another point. She
writes that we should extrapolate
grammar rules from one language that we
already know to another language. In
other words, we should take a structure
that we already know in one language and
apply it to a new one, assuming that it
will work the same way. This
cross-linguistic transfer might sound
logical to someone and it might work in
some cases. For example, when we learn
the languages that are structurally
close like Spanish and French for
example, but more often it leads to
interference and some fossilized errors,
unnatural usage. So I don't recommend
doing this. I have an example from my
life. I try to compare the grammar rules
of Turkish and Russian. Russian is my
native language and Turkish is was the
language that I was learning that time
and it turned out to be a terrible idea
because Turkish un unlike any other
languages I've studied has a completely
different structure and internal reason
and at some point I realized the only
way forward was to stop comparing and to
learn Turkish as Turkish on its own
terms. I believe it's more effective to
approach each language as an independent
system about reading. Catalon placed
reading at the very heart of language
learning. And for her, it's not just a
tool. So books are not just a tool. It's
the ultimate source of knowledge. And I
see why she emphasized the importance of
reading books so much. Because back in
her time, learners didn't have this
instant access to podcasts, to YouTube,
to online learning apps as we do. books
were the most reliable way to immerse
yourself in a language. So, and I do
agree reading is crucial. But what about
those people who don't like reading as
much as Lom did for example because I
have the type of students who don't
enjoy reading thick novels and that's
okay I think because you can read just
some short articles texts or even like
social media posts and yeah it's still
about engaging with meaningful content.
It's still about engaging with reading.
So if novels feel like a burden, you
don't have to force yourself. If you
don't like reading this kind of books,
start with short stories, with news,
with even subtitles of some series or or
films can be considered to be reading.
Another thing that Lom insists on is
that when you read, you shouldn't
translate every single word. She says
that stopping at each unknown word kills
the flow of reading and turns it into
torture. And because the real benefit of
reading is when you let the book the the
books carry you, even if some words slip
by, it's not that important to translate
every single word. If you do translate
every single word word, it means that
you the book is not suitable to you to
your level. probably you should change
it to something simpler. But if you
don't know some words, it's not
necessary to translate everything. You
can just instead try to figure out the
meaning through your mental effort. You
know this moment of discovery when you
realize what this word means can bring
you this joy of you know like cracking a
puzzle or something. So it's even more
satisfying and this satisfaction gives
you the opportunity to learn to memorize
the word more effectively. So when I
read in a foreign language, I don't aim
for translating every single word for a
perfect translation. I don't actually
translate. I just aim for understanding
the story and understanding the
characters, the message. I do write down
some collocations that I find useful,
interesting. I write them down in
Quizlet. This is the app that I use for
learning words. There is another
interesting point that I don't really
share. She writes that textbooks, the
best textbooks are written in the
learner's native language. I can
understand her point because back in her
time, the most popular and even the most
logical approach was that kind of
approach when you used your native
language to clarify the explanation.
Probably it was the safest way to avoid
confusion. But today, modern research
shows the opposite. In my own experience
as well, I work with Cambridge and
Oxford textbooks and most of my students
are Russian speakers and these books are
not in Russian. So we don't use the
mother tongue and yet they are extremely
effective. In fact, I almost never
switch to Russian when I when I teach in
class. And this is what some studies in
second language acquisition say. Early
and consistent exposure to the target
language helps learners think directly
in it instead of constantly translating
in their heads. Also, this modern
textbooks are created by qualified
specialists. They are built on solid
methodology with a very clear and
logical structure system. So, this makes
them accessible even for beginners
without the need for constant
translation into your native language.
So while I respect her perspective as a
reflection of her time, I believe the
most effective textbooks are those that
immerse learners in uh the language in
the target language from the very start.
So we've just talked about reading
textbooks and learning grammar
vocabulary, but none of these tools will
really work without consistency. That's
where discipline comes in. Of course,
motivation is important and she
emphasizes it again and again in her
book. She she writes that language
learning works best when it's connected
with your genuine interest when you
approach it through things that you
really like doing that you enjoy doing.
And I completely agree with her. Of
course, if you are curious, if you love
the content that you absorb, you will
naturally spend more time with the
language. You won't force yourself.
Relying only on motivation is a bad
idea. Motivation comes and goes. Some
days you feel inspired, other days you
don't. That's why I believe in the power
of self-discipline. So you need to make
learning a habit. How do you actually do
this? For me, the answer is small
regular steps. Over time, this little
routines, these little steps will become
as natural as brushing your teeth. This
is how I actually feel about learning
French or Spanish or any other language.
So motivation brings you to the
language. Discipline keeps you there and
patience allows you to see the results,
some lasting results. Catalom also
writes about some easy and difficult
languages and there is the stereotype
that English is really easy like it's
the easiest language to learn and
Chinese is uh labeled as impossibly
hard. But if we look closer, we will see
that it's a misconception because let's
take English. The grammar is relatively
simple, but then we face a jungle of
phrasal verbs, idioms, or multiple
meanings of the same word. We realize
that it's not as simple as everybody
thinks it is. For instance, the verb
turn can branch into dozens of
expressions like turn up, turn down,
turn, turn over, and each must be
learned in context because their
meanings can rarely match the logic of
our native language. Is English that
easy? Probably at the beginning, but
then when you reach a certain level, it
doesn't seem to be so easy. And on the
other hand, Chinese is often feared
because of its writing system. But once
you go deeper, uh, you find a strong
internal logic. Every character carries
meaning, often connected to visual
roots. And once you recognize these
patterns, the system begins to make
sense. And that leads to her central
point about the difficulty of languages.
Talking about languages as easy or
difficult is misleading because every
language balances its challenges and
advantages and what you lose in one area
you gain in another area. So instead of
asking which language is easier, a much
better question is which language
inspires me more to keep learning?
Because when you choose a language that
you genuinely love, its so-called
difficulties uh turn into puzzles that
you actually want to to solve. An
uncorrected mistake is a disaster. And
this is why we need a teacher because if
we keep repeating the same mistake, it
just doesn't stay. But it becomes
stronger. It becomes fossilized. and
later unlearning this mistake,
unlearning this wrong form is even
harder than learning it right from the
beginning. So this is why the best way
to study is to study with a teacher. A
good teacher notices the things that you
don't notice. Their feedback and
correction can save you hours or even
months of relearning. In a way, a
teacher is like a compass that who makes
sure you're not heading in the wrong
direction the wrong way. She also
mentions her personal experience in this
book. She said that she found it easier
to learn languages with female teachers
because because it was simpler for her
to to chat and build contact. This
detail may sound funny, but there is a
truth behind it that you should find the
teacher that you feel at ease with
because you will speak more. You will
not be afraid to make mistakes and this
way you will learn faster. Also, she had
to sign for Polish classes once and
instead of joining the beginners's
group, she went straight into the
advanced one. She insisted on it even
though she didn't know the language at
all, like a single word. And in her
case, it worked because she is strongly
motivated. She had no choice but to keep
up with the rest of the group in spite
of the pressure that she had. But for
some students, this strategy is not
good. like it cannot really work because
it's like throwing yourself into fire
and learning to survive. It sounds
really stressful and as a teacher I have
to say that it's not always the right
decision to take this kind of students
because one unprepared student can slow
down the rest of the group and in this
case the teacher has to spend extra
hours just explaining basic things to
that student who is not aware of
anything. A good teacher should place
students where they can progress
gradually uh consistently without
damaging the experience of the rest of
the class. So I do not understand why
that Polish teacher accepted her to that
advanced level of classes. So this book
once made me believe that I could become
a polygot. Honestly, it changed the
whole course of my life because it
inspired me to study linguistics. It
pushed me to explore several languages
and it shaped the way I teach my
students. Now although I don't share all
of her views, the influence is
undeniable. It gave me the spark of
motivation that I really needed in order
to decide where I want to what I want to
study in the future, what I want to do
in the future. I wouldn't be the person
I am today if I hadn't found this book
in a library. So, if you enjoy this kind
of videos, make sure you subscribe
because I'll be sharing some more
interesting stories, insights, and
strategies that will inspire you your
own language journey. I hope.